---
layout: text-page
title: Editorial Introduction
---
Katherine Anne Porter’s family correspondence documents her life and her career as a writer, provides context and resources for the study of her work, and shares insightful perspectives on many cultural and historical events of the twentieth century.  She was in New York City throughout the 1920s, in Mexico during the retrenchment after the Revolution ended in 1920, in Germany when the Nazis were beginning to gain power, in Paris with other expatriates in the 1930s, and in Washington, D.C., during World War II and during the administrations of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson.  Her friends and acquaintances included fellow writers, publishers, artists, cultural figures, and politicians.   

For these reasons, this digitized collection of Porter’s family correspondence offers sources for literary study and accounts of political, social, and cultural history Porter experienced that are of interest to members of the general public as well as to scholars in a many academic disciplines.  This digital collection has been created to make the family correspondence from the University of Maryland Libraries’ Katherine Anne Porter holdings available to the public.  The site has been designed with this broad range of users in mind, with the goal of creating a resource that is useful to visitors with varying degrees of technological expertise and familiarity with Porter.  The digitization project also facilitates long-term digital preservation of the included materials.

#### Selection of materials
The correspondence Porter wrote to her family members was selected for the digital collection because it is extensive enough to provide considerable insights into her life, work, and relationships, and because Porter’s family members were among her most intimate confidantes.  

Porter corresponded frequently with her older sister, Gay Porter Holloway, for over fifty years, making these letters an ideal starting point for the digitized collection.  In 2011, the University of Maryland Libraries facilitated the digitization of approximately 750 letters Porter wrote to Holloway for Professor Tanya Clement’s “Special Topics in Information Science: Introduction to Digital Humanities” class at The University of Texas at Austin’s School of Information. These letters formed the starting point for the digitized collection, which also includes four more of Porter’s most frequent correspondents: niece Ann Holloway Heintze, nephew Paul Porter, Jr., and husbands Eugene Pressly and Albert Erskine.  By including the less voluminous correspondence with other family members, as well, the digitized collection provides both a concentrated and a comprehensive view of Porter’s family relationships.

Although the University of Maryland Libraries also holds correspondence sent to Porter by her family members, the digital edition currently includes only the letters Porter wrote.  These letters were selected both because they document Porter’s own insights and because the trustee of her literary estate controls only the intellectual property residing in her work and not the intellectual property of other correspondents.
